Intro to computer networking (#16)
Kalschatzi/learning_platform: content/module2/4-i-visit-a-website.md

+++
title = "What happens when I enter a URL on a browser?"
type = ""
weight = 3
+++
 
 When you input a URL (Uniform Resource Locator) into a browser, a series of processes occur to retrieve the requested resource (like a webpage). Here are all the steps:

 ### 1 - User Enters URL

 You type a URL (e.g., https://learn.kalschatzi.com) into the browser’s address bar.

 ### 2 - DNS Resolution (Domain Name System)

 DNS Lookup: The browser first checks if the domain (e.g., learn.kalschatzi.com) is already cached from previous visits. If not, it queries a DNS server to resolve the domain name into an IP address (e.g., 192.0.2.1).
 * DNS Server Query: If the browser doesn’t have the IP cached, it asks DNS servers to find the IP address for the domain.

>  * Recursive Lookup: If the DNS server doesn’t have the information, it will query other DNS servers in a hierarchical process until it gets the correct IP address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Recursive Lookup: If the DNS server doesn’t have the IP address, it will query other DNS servers in a hierarchical order until it finds the correct IP address.
```

 ### 3 - Establishing a Connection (TCP/IP)

 TCP Connection: Using the resolved IP address, the browser establishes a TCP connection with the web server via the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) using the Three-Way Handshake.

 ### 4 - TLS/SSL Handshake (if HTTPS)

>  iff the URL starts with https:// (secure), the browser initiates a TLS/SSL handshake to encrypt the connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the URL starts with `https://` (secure), the browser initiates a TLS/SSL handshake to encrypt the connection.
```

* The server sends its SSL/TLS certificate to the browser to verify its identity (using a trusted certificate authority).
* The browser and server agree on an encryption method and establish a secure connection to prevent eavesdropping and tampering.

### 5 - HTTP Request
HTTP Request: The browser sends an HTTP request to the web server, asking for the resource (the webpage). 
The request contains the URL, HTTP method (GET), headers (e.g., user-agent, cookies), and other relevant data.

> **On a browser, the verb is always GET**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**When you enter a URL in the browser's address bar, the browser always sends a GET request**
```

### 6 - Web Server Processes Request

The web server processes the HTTP request and prepares a response. It may involve fetching data from a database, running server-side code (like Java with SpringBoot), or directly serving static files.

### 7 - HTTP Response

> The server sends back an HTTP response with the content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The server sends back an [HTTP response with the content](3-http##HTTP-Response-Structure).
```
